I think it's a lot easier for people to
talk about problem-based politics rather
than solution-based politics because
when we just talk about the problem we
don't have to look in the mirror and
admit to ourselves that we lack the
talent to accomplish the solutions I'm
gonna talk about veganism this video but
for a quick comparison if you're really
talking about solution based politics in
relation to global warming things get
technical quick anyone can just scream
about the fact that in global warming is
a problem carbon dioxide is a problem
water pollution is a problem problem
problem problem it seems real simple to
advocate for a problem all you're doing
is a screaming that this problem ought
to be in the newspaper headlines and
Parliament ought to do something about
it okay who has the expertise to really
lobby and really push forward and design
a solution involving solar power
involving wind power who can even answer
demanding questions about what those
solutions entail what advantages and
disadvantages what the sacrifices and
trade-offs are okay who can actually
deal with the extent to which satellite
technology and so-called
misting technology cloud creation
technology can mitigate the effects of
global warming can preserve the polar
icecaps
talent talent expertise knowledge
hardwork and you know a little bit of
money a little bit of a budget is
involved when we're talking about
solution based politics once in a while
people ask me stop talking with the
problems with vegan activism stop
talking with the problems in the vegan
movement and start talking about the
solutions here's the problem guys here's
the problem with talking about solutions
as soon as I start talking about
solutions the whole tone and tenor of
the video switches to lamenting that
these are solutions none of us are
working towards because we do not have
the
I think it's a very clear road ahead I
think the future of the movement what it
needs is completely obvious I'd be
interested if anyone's gonna write in
disagreeing with what I set out in this
video it's very clear but I've just
attended large-scale vegan activist
conference I gotta tell you something we
don't have the talent conference and
when tea was excellent single best vegan
event I've ever attended in my life
guess what it's depressing no why it's
not a single person at that conference I
could accomplish anything with in the
next five years even though some of them
are nice people some of them aren't some
were terrible people some of them are
nice people I like them you know met a
real nice guy who's planning on going on
permanent vacation in Hawaii it's gonna
go to Hawaii two years and I can't work
with them they don't nice guy though
great guy like a lot of things but I
really do I'd invite that guy to my
wedding I'd be happy if he married my
sister what a real a nice guy can't get
anything done with him and in the last
five six years in veganism I haven't met
one person with whom I could work to get
anything done in the next five years
to say I have come to an impasse would
be an understatement the whole movement
is that an impasse and here is why start
by illustrating this with just a little
anecdote talk to somebody at this
conference called up his Member of
Parliament he made a phone call to the
federal government here in Canada just
the highest level of government in
Canada this is the equivalent United
States to talking to your senator at the
federal level at the national level this
is talking to an elite level following
him up today I want to talk to you about
veganism secretary said okay well can
you describe to me what you want to talk
about said well you know factory farming
and ecology and you know government's
involvement with subsidies for this kind
agriculture and you know there are the
ethics and there's the health you know
try to get say okay okay one hour
appointment spent one full hour talking
face to face with an elected member or
the federal government and that Member
of Parliament was receptive and
appreciative and she offered to follow
up by meeting again not just with him
but meeting with the whole group of
activists said okay she'd show up for a
you know an event and talked to a
roomful of these these strange vegan
people maybe you would find that a very
heartening very encouraging for a
positive example it's very sad for me to
reflect on it today because I attended
this conference and so many people from
so many walks of life sat down in the
halls of academia some of the events
were outdoors as you saw on the lawn
under a tent but many many of the
lectures were given in rented rooms on
the University campus here people
presented seemingly sophisticated papers
about strategy and tactics and the law
and the future of the movement and you
know this morning I had to watch a video
of these same people the same people who
at least sat through all of these
lectures seemingly area di't
sophisticated complex lectures of with
these really very simple topics but what
we shouldn't shouldn't do for the future
at the moment this morning I received a
video of them breaking into illegally
breaking into a chicken slaughterhouse
and stealing chickens and getting
themselves arrested they were immersing
their arms in liquid concrete trying to
force the slaughterhouse to shut down
they were indulging in the worst kind
of attention-getting ambulance-chasing
extremists illegal protests that is
celebrated by groups like direct I
should never wear and indeed it was the
video was broadcast on the social media
of direct action everywhere and many of
the people in that video maybe even most
I just met them
I mean you know just that little
chitchat oh hey we know what do you do
for a living worry free mm-hmm not
people I know or trust but it's a little
bit different it's a little bit
different when you seen these people and
smelled them and when you're aware they
have sat through a seminar explaining to
them what the alternatives are
explaining to them that with just one
phone call they could deliver their
message to the most elite level of
government if they just had the humility
to participate in the democratic process
in a democratic country like Canada why
would you leap to getting yourself put
in prison breaking the law spending your
time in jail being denigrating and cruel
to the factory worker it's also an
element of that video I don't relate to
I don't appreciate putting your arms and
liquid concrete you know it's great
you're spending time in prison it's so
counterproductive it's not just
counterproductive for the optics of how
the vegan movement is is perceived
it's obviously counterproductive for
these people's own lives and one of the
kids at that event I met him a set met
him in person you know and then I see
this video of him doing this illegal
protest he looks 16 years old he could
be - look at him he looks 15 years I
don't know maybe he's 18
it's a great kid you got the rest of
your life ahead of you and now you're
gonna get yourself a criminal record and
hold into court and you know of course I
don't even think they're gonna do hard
time in jail but still there are gonna
be consequences for you for the rest of
your life
and you had an alternative Canada is not
Saudi Arabia Canada is not even Russia
there was a democratic participatory
process open to you and you chose not to
participate you chose to exclude
yourself because you'd rather think of
yourself as a radical and a
revolutionary you want the mystique of
going to prison instead of the actually
effective activism of talking to
Parliament and that's something you have
never even tried even though you just
attended a whole bunch of seminars in an
academic setting that explained to you
this range of completely legal positive
production off of productive options
that are set out in front of you what is
the path for the future of veganism
there are three elements they're linked
to do this in like two minutes flat
suppose you're cynical and say well if I
do talk to that Member of Parliament for
an hour they're not going to pass a law
tomorrow
that makes all slaughterhouses illegal
correct why is that it's because only
one of the three prongs of the future of
veganism just one has to do with
participating in the democratic process
okay
the progress you can make in Parliament
in the Senate and Congress is limited by
point to cultural progress why why was
it possible to pass laws for gay rights
in Canada and it's not possible in Saudi
Arabia legislative progress and cultural
progress are linked they have to go
hand-in-hand all right it's not a simple
mathematical formula but to some extent
you're not going to pass a law
protecting gay people for example
guaranteeing that gay people cannot be
fired from their job as a schoolteacher
because their sexual orientation passing
that law you first have to get out there
and do public education engagement
original cultural production you've got
to make the TV shows and movies and
music that that create an appreciation
for gay rights of the gay community that
creates a sensitivity to the issue in
this culture that gives people the sense
this is something that matters even it's
in a very vague sense throughout the
whole culture and I'm old enough to
remember that I'm old enough to remember
when people were freaking out because
there was the first gay character on TV
or the first gay kiss in a movie
the first gay character on a
science-fiction moving all this stuff it
may sound like a joke but it's not that
was that was in its way really part of
the cultural production of ideas that
she the transformation of our culture
from a homophobic one to basically a gay
rights appreciating culture if you want
a culture that's receptive to and
sensitive to animal rights that's
receptive to insensitive to ecology even
to the health concerns that drive the
vegan movement ahead okay it's not
enough to just lobby Parliament in a
vacuum it's not enough just to produce
pardon me it is not enough just to
participate in a democratic process
you've also got to be involved in
transforming the culture in the struggle
for original cultural production and
then there's the exception 0.3 the only
time you get to take a short cut you can
pass a law without the long hard
struggle change the culture is when
you've got hard scientific facts on your
side and sometimes we do in veganism
sometimes you can go to parliament and
say hey guys you ever heard of chromium
hexane chromium hexane is released by
leather people have leather couches in
their home they have leather coats
hanging in their closet it releases
chromium vaccine maybe I've got the
scientific facts to convince you that
this is a problem to such an extent that
legislation has to tackle it even
without any cultural sensitivity they
should even if nobody cares same way if
you can prove cigarettes cause cancer
maybe you can push ahead legislation to
try to eliminate cigarette smoking maybe
you can take the facts that are now
you know accepted by the United Nations
that have been in all the newspapers
maybe you can put together a dossier
with all the hard scientific facts of a
processed meat such as bacon and hotdogs
and say hey look guys there's a hard
scientific case here for why bacon
should never be served in hospitals for
why hotdogs should never be served to
schoolchildren for why it's immoral even
for the government to be providing
processed meat to prisoners in prison
here's the case so even if culturally
people aren't sensitive to it let's try
to move ahead with some kind of
democratic political change let's try to
pass legislation that basis those are
the three prongs that's what we have to
move forward with you know why it's not
happening because we do not have the
talent those poor pathetic people who
went to clip away at the chicken cages
to steal the chickens out of that go to
that slaughterhouse who put themselves
into liquid concrete who did this
terrible dramatic protest today those
poor people I know what it is they think
they're rebelling against I know what it
is they think they're at war with but in
reality what they're rebelling against
is their own feeling of impotence you
don't need the bullet when you've got
the ballot any one of you could have
picked up the phone and talked to
Parliament but on some deep level you
know that if you went to Parliament you
wouldn't have enough to say you know
that this movement doesn't have the
talent backing it to pursue any of those
three prongs we don't have enough talent
on the hard sciences side of things we
don't have enough talent in terms of
lawyers and lobbyists and the democratic
process side of things and we definitely
do not have the talent we do not have
the talent in terms of cultural
production in terms of bringing out new
storybooks to replace Curious George new
comic books to compete with Batman or
even movies that are maybe meant to
entertain people who are more than
sixty years old or new retirement homes
or new vacation decadent destinations
for people more than 65 years old there
are so many ways we can work to
transform the culture of carnism into a
culture that's appreciative of veganism
animal rights and so on but when you
start talking about solutions instead of
just complaining about the problems it
forces you to face up the fact that we
don't have the talent to get out and do
it